I guess this evening is dr. Richard
carrier he has a PhD in the history of
philosophy from Columbia University he's
a published philosopher and historian
specializing in contemporary philosophy
of naturalism and in greco-roman
philosophy science religion and the
origins of Christianity he bugs
regularly lectures for community groups
worldwide and teaches courses online
he's the author of many books including
Sense and goodness without God on the
historicity of Jesus why I am NOT a
Christian awesome book like that one not
the impossible faith because it's short
and I have a short attention span and
proving history as well as other
chapters and anthologies and articles
his most recent books include science
education in the early Roman Empire and
the scientist in the early Roman Empire
I'm sensing a theme okay so please
welcome dr. Richard carrier yeah so I
was asked to talk about the historicity
of Jesus and the question i'ma talk
about today there are many different
angles you could take on this and the
one that I'm going to take today is like
why would you even invent Jesus let's
just assume there wasn't one why did
they create one and then I'll talk a
little bit about the evidence for their
not having been one versus their having
been one and of course here when I wrote
my book on the historicity of Jesus
I'm only comparing two hypotheses the
hypothesis that there was never a Jesus
and the hypothesis that there was just
an ordinary Jesus a guy who wasn't
miraculous wasn't super famous but that
legends grew up around him in other
words the the next most plausible theory
if there is no God than Jesus was just
an ordinary dude and then the gospel
sort of built legends and myths around
him and people sort of deified him
that's entirely plausible and that's the
only hypothesis I take seriously in the
book I am in no way in that book dealing
with the miraculous fundamentalist
Christian Jesus hypothesis I just assume
that's already false so the questions
we're gonna be talking about today are
going to be relating those two different
Jesus's the the ordinary Jesus
hypothesis and the
the non Jesus hypothesis now first let's
orient with some evidence or orient with
some chronology one thing you should be
aware of in the ancient world the
average life expectancy for someone who
survived childhood was only 48 so back
then a lifetime is about half what it is
today and that's significant because he
means witnesses died off a lot sooner
and things can change and get lost in
history a lot quicker now the the
religion definitely began sometime
around 38 D no matter what the case but
the first documents we get of any
mention of Christianity or Jesus or
anything are the epistles of Paul that
end up in the New Testament now several
of those we know in mainstream consensus
is that they're forgeries Paul didn't
write them but seven of them it is
generally believed he did write those
seven even if he wrote them in different
forms and stuff originally but those
documents are the first documents we
have for the Christian Church and they
only refer to visions I'm going to talk
about that a little more later they'd
never talk about Jesus having a ministry
or anyone ever having met him in life
the first time anyone ever meets him or
encounters him is after his death and
and there are a variety of different
ways to interpret the epistles but
there's no direct claim that he was
actually a guy walking around on earth
in the epistle and the epistles the
authentic ones the Gospels come yet
another lifetime later by ancient
standards about 40 years after the
beginning of the religion you start to
see Gospels and then they get written
over a span of time between 75 and 115
AD maybe and that's the first time we
hear of any biography so we go from no
ordinary memoirs no ordinary history and
just immediately right out of the gate
wild religious mythologies about this
guy so there's no middle ground present
in the historical record and then all
other evidence comes later there's you
often hear people talking about Josephus
being late first century but the
evidence is pretty clear that either he
didn't mention Jesus or we can't
establish that he originally mentioned
Jesus other people sort of inserted
mentions of Jesus into his text
the first like very clear examples of
someone not a Christian something
outside the New Testament that mentions
Jesus were already about 115 AD and
later so we're already a really long
time after the beginning of the religion
and all those references appear to
simply refer back to the Gospels or to
Christians citing the Gospels so we have
no independent corroboration of the
Gospels and this produces an unusual
sequence of evidence the epistles they
only speak of a pre-existent celestial
being and a revealed gospel there are a
number of places where Paul says gospel
is known through revelation and hidden
messages in the scriptures like the idea
that it's known because Jesus preached
it and Galilee is not in Paul at all and
the Gospels come a lifetime later and
are wildly fictional even the stuff in
it that's not miraculous is unrealistic
and implausible and I'll give you some
examples later
and yet all later attestations to the
historicity of Jesus are based on the
gospel so these they sir these fictional
stories come out even if Jesus existed
these are fictional stories about him
and all later references are referencing
these so there's no independent evidence
and all other evidence from the first 80
years of Christianity's development was
conveniently not preserved not even in
quotation or refutation in other words a
great deal of other literary activity
that would have been happening including
tons of other letters don't survive not
only do they not survive we don't even
have mentions of them so the evidence
has been pretty well scrubbed and then
all other evidence we have is forged in
its place we have dozens of Gospels at
least 6 versions of Acts hundreds of
fake epistles doctored passages and so
on and when you look at Christian
literature you take like for example
Gospels acts and epistles and you count
the number of everyone agrees these are
forgeries against the ones that people
are think might be authentic the ratio
comes to be between 5 to 1 to 10 to 1
forgery to authentic which means that
forgery was the normal mode of literary
production for Christians in the first
twenty centuries so that tells you
something how the evidence is kind of
messed with it's highly unreliable
stuff's been taken away stuffs been
faked and messed with and altered so you
have to really get up to get at the
truth you've got to go through this lens
that's been hugely messed up to prevent
you from seeing the truth of what how it
actually began and you have to look for
clues that could sort of escaped that
net now what's the alternative
explanation let's suppose Jesus didn't
exist how then do we explain
Christianity there's some unusual yet an
indisputable facts that we can first
queue you in on one is that some
pre-christian Jews had already
identified a character in the Old
Testament named Jesus as a supreme
Archangel and gods firstborn son so that
belief already pre-existed Christianity
what Christianity did is they taught
that their Jesus was that Archangel so
they're taking an angel that already
existed in Jewish angelology and
attributing it to their guy now that
could be done for a historical guy they
could be saying that there was a
historical Jesus he's this angel who
came down and and taught us things but
either way whether it's that or not they
definitely have already borrowed this
Jesus figure from Jewish angelology
before their time and what they taught
that was different from what other Jews
were teaching about this angel was that
this angel Archangel descended
incarnated was killed and resurrected
that's the unique part of Christianity
as a Jewish sect they have this
particular doctrine and they teach this
doctrine in parallel to Satan's cosmic
story and if you know Satan the story of
Satan rebelling in heaven and being cast
down he's not cast down to earth he's
cast down into Upper heavens or the
lower heavens below the moon he sits up
in the sky and sky castles a hundred
thousand miles away sending his demons
down to meddle with us and whatnot
that's standard in Jewish demonology of
the ancient times but that whole story
was read out of Scripture it was found
in there or people wrote books about it
it's obviously not historical there was
no Satan there was no war in heaven it's
a myth so Satan is a is a non historical
person who the Jews put into history and
made a historical character and he's
also an archangel so and Jesus his role
I'll show you later reverses the role of
Satan Satan rebelled Jesus submitted and
thereby when Satan rebelled he brought
death and all the or horrible things in
the world by Jesus submitting he
canceled all the evils that Satan caused
so Jesus and Satan are mythically
designed to be opposition's Jesus was
designed to sort of cancel out Satan in
Jewish mythology so here's the
alternative theory that these events
were not revealed by actually happening
the the death incarnation death and
resurrection of Jesus were not witnessed
by anyone they were actually revealed
through private visions only to elect
persons if they are the apostles and
that Jesus was actually killed by Satan
and his sky demons in his kingdom above
the clouds now you might think that
sounds weird why would that be actually
we have a Christian texts called the
ascension of Isaiah written roughly
around the same time as the canonical
Gospels that originally once actually
said this that Jesus was killed by Satan
and his demons in outer space and
there's some clues as well as that other
sects were teaching this but those sects
all disappeared by the mid second
century and we don't get to hear
anything more about them we have no
documents from them the Ascension of
Isaiah only survives in doctored copies
in different versions where people were
trying to erase this part of it but
because we have different traditions in
different languages we're able to
reconstruct something of the original
and this again reversed the fall of
Satan Satan failed the test being given
the opportunity to be equal to God and
he tried to seize all power and rebelled
Jesus was given the opportunity to be
equal to God and he submitted all the
way to death and therefore cancelled
that out there's another parallel and
I'll get to some examples later in the
adjacent province so in Judea the
adjacent province was Egypt which had a
huge flourishing Jewish community
there's a lot of pilgrim travel between
Judea and Egypt at the time so there's a
lot of cultural communication going on
the main savior God and Egypt was Osiris
and Osiris has the same model where he
was placed in history as a pharaoh who
lived in a particular historical time
lived on earth and was killed and
resurrected and ascended to heaven
that's the version that was sold to the
public but the priests talked among
themselves and said that actually wasn't
true that that was just an allegory for
the real thing that happens which is
that Osiris descends just below the moon
where he's killed by the equivalent of
Satan in Egyptian mythology and
resurrects so they had the cosmic
version of just like I'm talking about
here that was the the real version and
then they had these public stories they
created and of course in Osiris's case
Egyptian history is superbly well
documented back thousands of years so we
can actually confirm there was
Oh Cyrus so we do know he was
non-existent person so we have this
exact same model to go by and it's going
on at the exact same province so it
wouldn't be so out of the ordinary for
it to occur in Judea
now analogous to I say and now I guess
Jewish sects notice I say Jewish sects
some all these religions I've lifted
here are actually just sects of Judaism
people try to think of them as distinct
no Christianity is just a Jewish sect
they changed some things Mormonism is
just a version of Christianity therefore
it's just a version of Judaism Islam is
just a version of Christianity which is
just a version of Judaism in fact Islam
looks a lot like the original Christian
sect which was Torah observant the
original Christian sect said no bacon
etc circumcised and all that Islam says
no bacon and circumcise and all of that
so they're actually still retaining a
lot of the original Torah observant
Christian elements so Islam is a sect of
Christianity it just grew up in a
particular region and got very
successful more successful than other
heretical sects but as a sect of
Christianity it's really just a sect of
Judaism
so technically Islam is just Judaism 3.0
or something so but what do they all
have in common
Mormonism you know thus the story Joseph
Smith has conversations with the angel
Moroni and seeing words on magical
plates and the Book of Mormon records
what those things said Islam Muhammad
has conversations with the angel Gabriel
and the Quran records the spoken
teachings of Gabriel as speaking as the
voice of God Christianity this theory
would say that the Apostle Peter has
conversations with the angel Jesus and
the New Testament records the hidden
deeds and teachings of that angel that
would be the analogy for this
alternative explanation for the origins
of Christianity the one thing that
happened differently is that like all
other Savior gods in that particular
period they got historic eyes even
though they didn't exist originally the
same thing happened to this angel he got
his story that Moroni and Gabriel did
not now can we argue against that theory
there are a variety of different
attempts to try and say that that can't
be I wish I had the slide of showing
Luke Skywalker saying you know it can't
be my father it's impossible
but I'll point out some of the best ones
this is the the best attempts to argue
it and you really can't get it from the
Gospels because the Gospels are so
dubious and have no sourcing so the
Gospels aren't useful you can't get it
from extra biblical evidence because
they're all based on the Gospels so
they're they can't independently
corroborate them so it leaves you with
epistles those seven authentic epistles
of Paul and that's really all we have so
we've got to kind of dig in there if you
want to prove there was a historical
Jesus you've got to find it in there and
one of the places that the people who
defend historicity find it is that twice
Paul refers to this group of people
called the Brothers of the Lord and the
assumption is oh those are the
biological brothers of Jesus therefore
he must have really existed the problem
is that the only brothers of the Lord
Paul ever talks about knowing anything
about our cultic brothers of the Lord
all baptized Christians our adopted sons
of God and therefore brothers of each
other and therefore brothers of the Lord
Paul says Jesus is the firstborn of many
brethren meaning we're all brothers of
the Lord so those passages become
ambiguous does he mean baptized
Christians or does he mean biological
brothers of Jesus he never says and you
would think if he if he the only version
he talks about explicitly are the cultic
version if he's gonna refer to a
biological version he would have to
specify it you have to say like brothers
of the Lord and the flesh or something
like that really emphasize I don't mean
baptized Christians I mean the actual
biological brothers of Jesus but he
never actually seems aware of the need
to make that distinction so it does
suggest that actually when he uses that
phrase he only means the cultic version
but at best it's ambiguous we can't
really build anything off of that there
are a couple of passages where he's two
passages one passage of where it says
you'll often see it translated that he
descent he's descended from David
descended from David is not in the Greek
it actually says literally in the Greek
it says manufactured from the sperm of
David and there's another reference to
him being born of a woman it's the exact
same word manufactured out of a woman
now in the case where you talking about
David the suggested that's ambiguous
what do you mean manufactured out of the
sperm of David do you mean literally or
do you mean is that a reference to
descent what does that actually mean
it's ambiguous the word that Paul uses
there and also uses in the case fo the
woman passage the word Paul uses there
is the word that Paul uses for divine
manufacture it's for the when he
mentions the creation of Adam uses that
word when he mentions the creation of
our future resurrection bodies which by
the way are waiting for us in heaven
like like empty zombie shells for us to
go inhabit and I'm not kidding that's
that's 2 Corinthians 5 Paul's very
explicit those bodies are already there
waiting for us Paul uses the same word
so he's not talking about birth from
like natural birth the way we're talking
about when Paul does refer to natural
birth he uses a different word in the
Greek and this was so disturbing to
Christians that we have it examples and
Bart Ehrman shows this in his book
Orthodox corruption of Scripture we have
examples of Christians trying to change
the one word to the other because they
know Paul's using word for manufacture
and using a different word for birth so
they tried to switch it over on both of
these passages we have manuscripts where
there we have the attempts by scribes to
screw with it but those are late so we
have earlier manuscripts and that can
make and establish that no that isn't
actually the reading and everybody now
agrees the paul used the disturbing word
rather than the obvious word another
example is when he's talking about the
born of a woman actually Paul's argument
there is allegorical and he explicitly
says I'm talking about allegorical women
I don't mean an actual biological woman
I mean the world order to which you are
born so if you're born into a particular
world you have a particular mother but
then you know that can get into the
debate over the semantics of the
rhetoric of Paul and so on I think
ultimately it gets ambiguous so once
again these are very ambiguous passages
they're not predict they're not
particularly good evidence for
historicity but to get back to that
James example I'll give an example of
why the mainstream views are often based
on long-held Christian faith assumptions
and actually don't hold up when you look
at the evidence and this is an example
everybody assumes Jesus had a brother
named James but when you look at the
evidence it doesn't really hold that up
or Jesus had a brother named James James
who was ahead in the church a leader of
the church the evidence doesn't hold
that up none of the brothers of Jesus
not the James Jude or anyone in the New
Testament are said to be apostles
anywhere in the entire New Testament so
we actually don't have an explicit
statement saying that any of the
Brothers of Jesus were apostles even the
book of Acts has no knowledge of this
being a case so the one place where we
have the origins the history of
Christianity from its first public
announcement in its first 30 years
at no point is there a brother of Jesus
leading the church not James not anybody
the letters we have in the New Testament
by James and Jude neither of those
letters say they are the brother of
Jesus
mark has Jesus disowned his brothers
just outright like you aren't my
brothers anymore these are my brothers
and so he shows no knowledge of any of
them ever joining a church Luke alone
puts them all in the church in acts 1
but then they vanished from history like
I said and so do his mom and dad by the
way they they're somehow as soon as you
get the actual history of the church all
the family of Jesus disappear the first
time his brothers appear as apostles is
in wildly ridiculous stories written
over a century later so you see the
legend seems to be growing in that
direction the family gets invented over
time in just the same way that the
family of Moses was invented over time
and everybody who's not a fundamentalist
now agrees that Moses is a fictional
person that he was mythical it didn't
exist and yet he has named brothers and
sisters and so on so merely having named
brothers and sisters does not make you a
historical person fictional people have
brothers and sisters too and there's
other passages in Paul people refer to
what Paul says Jesus describes the the
Latsis they'll say the Last Supper at
his right before he's executed and he
says well actually Paul never calls at
the Last Supper that would have been a
useful thing because that would suggest
that there were lots of other suppers
before it no he only calls it the Lord's
Supper and he says he received it
directly from the Lord in other words
what he communicates there is from a
vision he's hallucinating or dreaming or
claiming to hallucinate or dream and
claiming he received it that way not
from any witnesses and when he describes
the eucharist event there's no one else
present he doesn't mention anyone being
there it's just Jesus communicating it
to his community spiritually there's a
reference to the rulers of this age
crucifying him but who were they
Paul never uses it the phrases are cons
of this Aion meaning princes of this
universe or princes of this this cosmic
era he never uses that phrase of human
leaders or rulers he uses similar
terminology to refer to the demonic
forces that rule the world
so is he talking about Satan and his
demons or is he talking about Romans is
he talking about Jews
we're not sure there's a people will say
well he uh outright says the Jews killed
him that's in 1 Thessalonians except
pretty much like 80 percent of
mainstream experts agree that that's an
interpolation the passage where Paul
blames the Jews for killing Jesus is not
only not only has historical mistakes in
it so it's factually impossible that
Paul would write it but it's also
contains an unpolished emmett ISM the
the anti-semitism reflects later
Christian thought not Paul's thought
itself it contradicts the things he said
about the Jews elsewhere so that passage
people generally agree with something
that someone added to the text that
wasn't originally in Paul and then
you'll hear someone will say well there
Paul says that he confessed before
Pontius Pilate in 1 Timothy but all
mainstream scholars agree that 1 Timothy
is a forgery Paul did not write that ok
so the evidence looks dodgy when you
start looking at it and so when you
actually start picking at each piece of
evidence and it dissolves and you start
comparing the two different hypotheses
as to how well they explain the evidence
that remains that's what I do in the
book I look at all the evidence -
everybody's presented both pro and con
that's why it's so huge plus you could
give a lot of important background
knowledge that you can use to understand
and interpret that evidence and I find
even being as generous as I can to the
historicity hypothesis I still find a 2
and 3 chance that the alternative
hypothesis is a better explanation is
the one that's true for the origins of
Christianity now that still means
doesn't 1 in 3 chance that there's a
Jesus that he really was an ordinary
Jesus and that's how the religion
started so that's on the most generous
side and then when I look at it in the
way that I think in terms of the most
most skeptical side I come to twelve
thousand to one odds against the
historicity of Jesus so those are my
margins of error
they're very wide because the data is
really crappy so why would they do that
here's a clue to Peter
and there in the gospel there's 1st
Peter in 2nd Peter they are written by
different people the style authorial
style of both of them is so radically
different that we know they were not
written by the same person and 2 Peter
refers to 1 Peter which means it's a
dead giveaway that 2 Peter is a forgery
so everybody agrees - Peter is a forgery
a lot of scholars think that 1 Peter is
also a forgery I think they're wrong but
that's not relevant because one Peter
never actually places Jesus in history
is something witnessed so that's a
problem but two Peters definitely a
forgery everybody agrees now the
interesting thing is is why would they
Forge it what are they doing in it and
if you read to Peter its main messages
to say this that we did not follow
cleverly devised myths we were
eyewitnesses of his majesty
and then immediately forges an
eyewitness account of meeting Jesus on
earth and it does this to answer not
critics of Christianity but they're
attacking fellow Christians otherwise
unknown Christians who were claiming
that such a Jesus was a cleverly devised
myth not something someone met in person
so that's why this this letter is forged
to attack that sect of Christians which
kind of gives us clue that there was
such a sect of Christians to attack now
the thing is we're not told anything
about else about that sect we have none
of their documents we don't know the
name of the sect WA we did we know
nothing about them everything was purged
and destroyed so here we know there was
a sec saying this but we're not allowed
to see anything about when that sect
originated what they were saying what
their documents were or anything like
this this is an example of a clue that
slipped through the lens of the
distorted lens that was created now why
the allegory the Gospels being
originally allegorical why that Eclipse
mystery various scholars have proposed
different theories note the null thesis
is that we see this all the time
actually we look at the cargo cults you
look at the ancient mystery cults you
look at the hadith it's the natural
progression to start historic izing and
inventing history and inventing persons
that did things and said things
religions tend to do this so it actually
makes sense that they would another
example that we have is Origen himself
this is a Christian scholar of the third
century he actually lets slip in a
discourse once that he says that you
have to control the masses and to
control the illiterate lower ranking pew
filling Christians it requires feeding
them literal stories and letting them
believe that they're literally true
because they're not educated enough not
advanced enough to understand the
allegorical meaning and you need to save
them or otherwise they're going to die
and then they'll end up in hell so to
save them it's better to just let them
believe the literal story
and then if they move up enough and get
enough education and can under then you
can let them in and say okay these
things are just allegories you got to
understand the true story is not the
literal part that's a clue to the kind
of mindset of the Christian elite of
this particular sect the sect that he
was and then this exit eventually gained
power and decided all documents it would
survive that's kind of the mindset so
they're actually trending towards let's
try outselling the allegory as literal
because it's a better way to grow a
large Church because that's really hard
to pack the pews with people when you're
trying to explain this complicated - an
allegorical version of Jesus it's better
they're much more impressed by the
literal Jesus so the trend was to stick
to a more literal Jesus another factor
is the first century bottleneck we have
a letter of Pliny the Younger the first
time first time in history that any
non-christian we have mentions the
existence of Christians in 110 AD he
writes a letter about this and what that
letter reveals is that there actually
were extremely few of Christians like
there were so few this got plenty of the
younger was one of the most legally
experienced person in the Empire like
he's you know it's hard to explain
there's a whole lot list of all his
offices he's held for decades and yet
he's never been present at a trial of
Christians didn't know what they were
guilty of and didn't know what
punishments to exhibit and so he has to
ask the Emperor and another thing that
he points out is that most of the people
that he interviewed there was an
anonymous list of accusing people of
being Christians he interviewed that
most of them had quit being Christians
like 20 years before or 10 years before
so that really he was very few people
were actually still Christians and
there's so few of them that even Pliny
the Younger didn't even know what they
were guilty of or what why they were
illegal he eventually punished them for
being being an illegal assembly in the
ancient Roman Empire they didn't have
amendment rights that would allow rights
of a sent peaceable assembly you have to
assemble you actually had to get a
license from the state and if you didn't
you was automatically assumed that you
were organizing and agitating against
the state so the opposition to
Christians was not religious it was
political the fact that they're meeting
at night or meeting without the
permission of the state simply looked
simply looked suspicious to the state
and was literally illegal
so it had nothing really to do with
their being a religion originally that
changed in subsequent centuries but the
point being is that this shows that
there were so few Christians by 110 AD
you can understand why it would be easy
for the history of the church to
radically alter it would just take a few
people to start selling a different
version and there's not enough people
left to gainsay that version of things
because the religion who was kind of
dying out and then someone reacts
clouded it by publishing these books to
try and sell Jesus ISM and pushing a
literal version so it was actually easy
to get one to eclipse the other another
factor is historical accident the sect
that was most promoting the historical
Jesus verses for example in 2 Peter the
sect that that letter was forged to
attack that letter was forged by the
sect that actually eventually gained
Constantine's ear the Emperor
Constantine the first Christian Emperor
who started shifting money around from
pagan temples to Christian churches and
actually really got Christianity into
the empire as a state religion and that
turned out to be the most fundamentalist
and illiterate literalist sect of them
all Constantine for example the tutor he
chose for his children was lacked ancius
and langt ancius was like the Ken Ham of
the ancient world this is a time when I
give a whole lecture on this on this
connait Canada tour about ancient
science that all educated people at that
time knew the earth was a sphere they
had really good multiple core operatory
empirical evidences that the earth was a
sphere lacked ancius wasn't having it he
said it's entities I just dismiss all
that evidence it's impossible for the
earth to be a sphere because that means
there's upside down people on the other
side of it and that's just ridiculous so
this is the sect that actually gained
political power and then eventually
decided what books and stuff just to
survive so that's a big factor in
determining which version of
Christianity ended up prevailing in
history and that like I said that sects
had absolute power decided all document
survival for a thousand years with very
few exceptions like the NAG Hammadi find
but that comes in early Middle Ages are
these few surviving sects stashed some
of their documents in pots in the early
Middle Ages and they survived for us to
find them today but we have nothing
we're very little that's earlier than
that and certainly nothing earlier than
50 ad so the first hundred years of
Christianity are a blank to us all that
evidence all the original sects all the
evidence of them is gone okay so that's
some of that stuff well let's give you
some more context that or this will make
even more sense now this is the stuff
that you might hear on the Internet
some of its really terrible so be aware
on the internet of claims like this I'm
about to go through a lot of that stuff
is terrible please don't ever go
repeating that Jesus is just like Horace
that's not true so there's a lot of
false facts about Horace forget Horace
just erase Horace from your memory
there's better analogies um these are
some of the best and I know you probably
don't even know maybe three or four of
these are all of them possibly but these
are the these are the gods for which we
have good pre-christian evidence that
they were dying and rising gods that had
attached salvation cults Osiris Adonis
Romulus Zell Maxis and in Nana in fact
the first one in history is in Nana so
it actually started with a woman and in
typical patriarchal style the woman's
story gets replaced with a man's story
so instead of a woman being crucified
and resurrected on the third day now
it's suddenly a man being crucified and
resurrected on the third day because who
needs goddesses right I don't know
anyway that story by the way is very
interesting it would have been a more
interesting religion if we were to have
kept that I don't know if any of you
studied in Donna she's an interesting
person in mythical history but Mithra
who's also a savior god of this time is
not a dying and rising god you'll often
hear the claim that he's one of these
dying and rising gods it's not the case
it's we don't know exactly his gospel we
don't have his written Gospels they
existed but we don't have them what we
do have our comic books basically the
graphic novels this right here is a
graphic novel of the gospel of Mithra
carved in stone that tells the whole
gospel in pictured so it's like having a
picture Bible without the text and
you're trying to figure out what on
earth is going on but what doesn't
happen here is his dying he doesn't die
in resurrect he undergoes some other
great suffering and struggle that gives
him power over death so that's still the
analogy and that's relevant because
there are numerous personal Savior
deities
personal saviors Mithra was a personal
Savior
Anana was as well Osiris was as well and
there are many different ones not all of
them are dying in rising gods some
underwent some other kind of suffering
but they're all the rage at that time
know what they all have in common are
these they're all Savior gods so you get
personal salvation by attaching yourself
to them they are all the Son of God or
occasionally the daughter of God they
all undergo a passion apotheon in greek
the exact same word that the Christians
use of Jesus there is a passion of
Osiris there is a passion of Inanna and
so on The Passion of the Christ is
actually the latest is kind of the
newest version of them idea and through
that passion the stuff with passion
meaning suffering or struggle some sort
of great suffering or struggle they
undergo that by which they have to end
through going that through that they
obtain victory over death and they share
that victory over death with their
followers often through baptism and
communion the idea of baptism and
communion as the means of sharing in the
death and resurrection or the conquest
of death of your Savior God predates
Christianity in multiple cults so it's
actually not unique to Christianity it
is a it is a lift from another cultural
trope and all of these Savior gods have
stories about them set in human history
on earth just like Jesus yet none of
them ever actually existed so in fact if
you look at the the the galaxy of people
in which Jesus fits to make him the
historical would make him extraordinary
he would be the weirdo out of all of
them oh you can barely see at the bottom
of that oh well sorry there is a
sentence there but anyway so you need
evidence we're gonna say Jesus is the
exception to all these guys and then
some girls we need evidence for that
so the Jewish context now what happened
is all of those other Savior gods every
national culture had one so the Greeks
had one the Egyptians had when the
Syrians had one what was now a turkey
that that culture had won the Thracians
did and they would take their local
religion and merge it with this basic
model and create a new version of the
religion that would be different from
all the others but have those same
features that I just mentioned and some
others so what the Jews appeared to have
done there
sect a small fringe countercultural sect
of the jews did is they took this model
and did what all the other surrounding
cultures did is basically make a jewish
version of it so they created a jewish
personal savior and to do that they
build off of the most fundamental
structure of ancient Judaism at the time
as a religion which is all based on
atonement sacrifice basically blood
magic blood magic that would wage the
anger of God and secure the blessings in
this life and in the next and it begins
with the story of Isaac right Abraham is
commanded to sacrifice Isaac his
firstborn son to assuage the anger of
God and God stops him at the last minute
he's gonna do it he's totally obedient
and God stops and says no okay I'll let
you substitute an animal and that
actually is in Jewish lore and legend
the beginning of the Yom Kippur
principle the Yom Kippur ceremony where
you would take a goat as a substitute
for people and kill it and that it's
atonement would affect us wage the anger
of God and atone for the sins of Israel
the sins being the things that offend
God now that was the basic model but the
problem is of course that that animal
blood is less powerful less magical than
human blood and therefore you have to
repeat this every year so every year at
the Jewish temple or equivalent there
was a ceremony where you would have the
goats and I'm gonna talk about the
ceremony a little more there's a few
more details that are relevant to
Christianity but the basic idea is this
you sacrifice this animal and all the
sins of Israel are canceled but that
wears out the magic only lasts a year
the spell duration is only one year so
you have to keep doing it and this
especially became a problem when the
temple cult was destroyed by the Romans
Oh No
now how do we get atonement there's no
temple to do the ritual in and that was
a crisis for the rabbinical Judaism they
have to solve it in other ways
Christianity was already on board with
solving the problem because they wanted
to eliminate the temple even before it
was destroyed because they were an anti
temple sect like the Qumran sect was
that they thought that the temple cult
had become so corrupt that it was
actually preventing the end of the world
they wanted the end of the world they
wanted to bring doomsday on and the
reason God wouldn't do it is because he
the Jews keep sinning I was like well
keep sitting I'm not gonna come and save
you and so this these countercultural
sex saw that the temple is getting in
the way well if the temple cult is
corrupt will never end sin so what if we
just get rid of the temple cults
theologically so it's no longer even a
component with you were direct to God
skip the middleman then we can like
appease God and then maybe we'll bring
on the end of the world like we want to
have happen
and so Jesus when you look at the
epistles of Paul it's very clear that
the really the sole and most important
function of Jesus in their in their
theology is that he replaces the temple
he replaces both the Passover sacrifice
and both the Yom Kippur sacrifice if you
attach yourself to Jesus you no longer
need the temple ritually no longer need
the yom kippur because jesus being and
you know the archangel the firstborn son
of god that's the most powerful magic
blood that you can get so if you
sacrifice that so if you sacrifice this
guy the spell duration is infinity so
you no longer need to repeat the ritual
year after year therefore you no longer
need the temple and you can see this you
can read this throughout the letters of
pala that really is the role that Jesus
performs everything else about terms
teachings and moral teachings and stuff
was just add-ons to that to court of
create the local community that they
were trying to construct but the
function the actual function of Jesus
theologically is to replace the temple
as the ultimate sacrifice and so that
was the version that they imported into
this model of a savior deity so they've
sort of created a Jewish version of this
Savior DD that has a path Eon has a
passion and a death and resurrection and
through which he gains victory over
death and shares with his followers with
through baptism and communion and all of
that stuff so that's that but let's get
to Jesus in the Gospels I told you
earlier faith literature was typically
fake there's some 40 Gospels by the way
half a dozen Acts dozens of forger
pistols or more actually depending on
when you count but even Exodus
Deuteronomy Kings Daniel s their
Maccabees Tobit joseph and aseneth and
other Testaments and lives of the
patriarchs Jewish literature was
typically faked to it really a lot of
Jewish literature was really fanfiction
off the Bible there would be like one
line of the Bible that says something
really weird and then someone would
write a huge book explaining that one
line so it's just like you know Harry
Potter fanfiction or something except
they took it seriously well the
Christians did that to the Christians
for example eventually got annoyed that
there were no stories of baby Jesus so
they invented a toddler Jesus that
wanders around town and kills all the
local villagers villager kids for
annoying him just to show that he's God
and you shouldn't offend God it's
actually one of the scariest Bible or
scariest Gospels that you'll read it's
like a script for the omen that was too
scary even for the film industry so yes
so they're writing a lot of fake stuff
so we have to be aware of their fakery
one of the most interesting things I
told you about nog kamati right so in
nach mati we actually have an example of
them in the process of faking a document
they have the original source document
which is this letter written by someone
else and someone was creating a
narrative of Jesus risen a resurrected
Jesus interacting with his disciples
borrowing literally the text from that
other letter and there were they were
halfway done with it and then they
apparently they're kind of gonna come
and get killed or something cuz they
just swept their whole desktop into the
pot and then now 2,000 years later we
can see their work halfway through so we
can see even in process of how stuff got
invented about Jesus a lot of books on
this John Dominic Crossan this book the
power of parable is really excellent
demonstration that the Gospels are just
it in extended parables that they're not
really shouldn't be they shouldn't be
taken as history they should be taken as
parables in themselves Randal Helms
gospel fictions is another example I
give examples in proving history and
then of course I give tons in chapter 10
of on the historicity of Jesus most of
which are drawn from the peer-reviewed
literature so it's not even you don't
even have to take my word for it a lot
of the stuff is actually already in the
literature that people just haven't put
it together in one place for you to see
how widespread this understanding of it
is so here's the clue to this mark as
soon as in the Gospel of Mark as soon as
Jesus starts talking about the gospel
almost immediately when he starts doing
that he says this this is Martin chapter
four then Jesus says whoever has ears to
hear let him hear
but when he was alone the twelve and the
others around him asked him about the
parables he told them the secret of the
kingdom of God has been given to you
but to those on the outside everything
is said in parables so that they may be
ever seeing but never perceiving and
ever hearing but never understanding
otherwise they might turn and be
forgiven then jesus said to them don't
you understand this parable how then
will you understand any parable and then
he goes on to explain that the story he
just told is not literally true it
represents something symbolically
so mark is really giving the reader a
key he's saying my whole gospel this is
how you should read my whole gospel and
if you don't read my whole gospel this
way you're one of those outsiders who's
not gonna know how to turn and be
forgiven and here's an example of that
does how many people know that Jesus
hates FIGS yeah it's true he does okay
so in mark 11 Jesus is walking along and
he's hungry and he sees a fig tree over
a distance away and it mark goes out of
his way to say it wasn't the season for
figs and that Jesus knew it wasn't the
season for figs but he walks up to the
tree anyway I don't know why to go look
and get for gissy figs and get some fake
figs to eat he goes up there and there's
no figs to eat but obviously there
wouldn't be it wasn't the season for the
tree to be in fruit but he gets angry at
the tree and curses it and say may never
bear fruit again and then the next day
they come over and has been withered to
its very roots now this is obviously a
fictional story it never happened I mean
people don't have the secret x-man power
of withering fig trees so so we know
it's a false story so why is it being
told what's the point of this story but
even if you had the secret x-man power
of withering fig trees you still
wouldn't curse a fig tree forbearing not
bearing fruit out of season so why would
mark say that I mean he's making Jesus
even if we assume Jesus was a miraculous
wizard he's making him what crazy why
would he do that it doesn't make any
sense if you read it literally but it
does make sense if you don't read it
literally the entire story actually is
an allegory for God's and bandit ment of
the temple if this is a story for why
the God allowed the Romans to come and
raise the temple and destroy the temple
called and end it one for all the fig
tree actually represents the temple and
basically Jesus acting in the world of
God curses it and says may you never
bear fruit again and it's withered to
its very roots and so he's explaining
that's why you know God said it's no
longer the season for that we're getting
rid of it and
immediately he says what would you do
now is you pray to me and this and yada
yada so he's talking about what God has
replaced it with so that it's a whole
thing as an allegory for that and I
didn't make that up that actually comes
from the peer-reviewed literature our ji
Hammerton Kelly writes an article called
the sacred violence and the Messiah so
this is in the scholarship so this is
things that doesn't get communicated the
public very often and one of the clues
for that one of the reasons you can
interpret it that way is not just
because you can think it out but Marc
writes by wrapping stories around
stories there's a lot of Pat places in
mark where you have a story begins and
it gets interrupted and then some other
story happens and then you go back to
the ending of the original story and
this is one of them and so that you have
the cursing of the fig tree and then the
day later they come and find it wither
do you know what happens in between
those two events does anybody know the
clearing of the temple Jesus goes in the
temple condemns the temple is something
corrupt and and throws everybody out the
money changers out and so on so wrap
when mark does as he wraps one story
around another they're meant to be
commentaries on you on each other so
that's the this tells you that this is
all about the temple so that's what
that's how mark is writing he's not
writing literal history no he's this
isn't a memory this isn't something that
was passed on to him through oral Laura
this is something he's very carefully
crafting he's wrapping a story around
another he's using allegory he's
actually building all this out to sell a
message to actually say this is why God
condemned the temple cult this is what
we're replacing it with and so it's all
about the message it's not about the
historical truth of the thing and when
you go from story from story from story
to story throughout the Gospels
especially mark it's all like this every
single one is like this it either look
it's when you look at it originally it
looks stupid and weird like that can't
possibly have happened and then you look
at it allegorically and then suddenly it
makes a great deal of sense so the whole
of the Gospels are written in this in
this mode there are other examples why
John baptizes Jesus I mean Christ in
that story is a model for Christians
it's what would Jesus do he would submit
to baptism it tells you what baptism
looks like it tells you what baptism
means it's adoption by God and so on it
emulates the crucifixion the baptism is
a death and rebirth into eternal life
and it was so in Osiris cult before the
Christians borrowed the idea
and it was also in Jewish cults before
Christianity or Jewish sects before
Christianity adopted the idea and their
various other aspects to this you can
talk about like Christ submission
reverses Satan's rebellion and things
like that and that's why for example if
you notice as soon as Jesus submits to
baptism therefore reversing the
rebellious nature of Satan he
immediately gets tempted by Satan and
survives all the temptations he resists
the temptations there's a reason why
those two are joined together and then
of course see if you have Jesus being
baptized by John and John is actually
declaring Jesus his successor this is
the best story to invent because you
actually want to co-opt the fame of the
Baptist cult and get rid of some
competition another example and I
alluded to this earlier you know the
story that Pilate according to custom
offered them a released prisoner they
every time there was a holiday or this
particular holiday he would release a
prisoner to the Jews and the Jews chose
the murderer and rebel leader Barabbas
now Roberts I don't know if you know
means son of the Father in Aramaic so in
some manuscripts in fact he's named
Jesus Barabbas so we have two jesus sons
of the Father in this story that's kind
of suspicious also no such custom
existed we know for a fact there Pilate
would never did that and never would
have done that but also what we notice
here is there now we're looking at this
it's matching the Yom Kippur ritual I
was talking about because the Yom Kippur
ritual didn't just involve sacrificing a
goat you would get two identical goats
one of them you would cast all the sins
of Israel on to run it out into the wild
and then actually it would chase it and
push it off a cliff and the other is the
one the pure one would be the one that
you would sacrifice and it's blood
falling on the altar would atone for the
sins of Israel this is an allegory for
exactly the Yom Kippur ritual saying
that Jesus is the true Yom Kippur
Barabbas and his ways of murder and
rebellion those are the sins of Israel
and if you choose him you are actually
choosing the sins you got to choose
Jesus he's the true sacrificial goat so
the whole story doesn't make sense as
history but it makes sense as an
allegory for Jesus being the Yom Kippur
Barabbas is the scapegoat Jesus is the
blood
so what was the myth for the gospel
serve the function of being new
scriptures the Christians didn't like
the old scriptures because there were
certain things about it that were
old-fashioned Jesus is the new Moses in
the new Elijah and in fact they take
stories from Moses and Elijah and update
them so a lot of the stories about Jesus
are actually revised versions of stories
about Moses and Elijah
they are gospel guides for missionary
life every little poppy in the Gospels
has a little thing that you can use to
respond to people who are arguing with
you dealing with miracles family
doubters enemies and so on so it's
useful for missionaries to actually if
they get challenged by something is it
well let me tell you a story and then
they would tell the story and then they
could riff off of the story and make
themselves look very impressive the
Gospels explained ritual these are
explaining the origins the myths that
explain the origins of rituals baptism
Eucharist martyrdom they explained the
gospel itself through parables for
example as Mark 4 says but later they
were used to establish a stable
Authority the biggest problem with
earliest Christianity is that if it was
originated from visions anybody can come
along and say Jesus spoke to me in a
vision and he changed his mind and now
we're gonna do this other thing
and we have that Paul does that right so
he's an interloper he comes in and says
Jesus spoke to me and he says we're
gonna do this different thing and he had
to struggle really hard and you can see
hints in the Gotha and the epistles of
him he also had to collect a lot of cash
and bring it to Jerusalem to convince
the original apostles to go along with
his scheme of things and accept his
church into theirs but eventually that
starts to get annoying you can't
constantly have people having visions of
Jesus so what's a convenient thing to do
say you could say oh you know the
allegorical versions of Jesus are
actually literally true there actually
were disciples he hand-picked them and
those disciples pick their successors
and you don't have a pedigree that goes
back to the historical Jesus and you
can't because there wasn't a historical
Jesus you can create a sect that you can
try and argue that you can't come into
this sect and change things by saying
you had a vision you have to have a
pedigree now of course to do that they
invented the pedigrees and then you have
this propaganda arms race with different
sects
all inventing pedigrees claiming you
know I come back five I could descend
from Peter or whatever so it didn't
really work but we have many examples of
religions trying to do this all right so
I'll end with this
that's justice by the way it's just a
tip of the iceberg there's some aspects
of how this makes sense some aspects of
the evidence some aspects of the debate
there's many more things that's you
notice the book is rather large but I'm
gonna end with an analogy so you can
kind of see how this all fits the
Roswell flying saucer what really
happened in 1947 in New Mexico a guy
found some sticks and tinfoil in the
desert I mean that's like really what
happened what was said to have happened
it was debris from an alien spacecraft
what was said to have happened within
just 30 years an entire flying saucer
was recovered complete with alien bodies
that were autopsy by the government now
notice how rapid that legendary
development is and yet there are so
millions of people who believe it
despite vast really solid evidence
against it so even in this age of
universal literacy universal education
photographs newspapers government
records all of that stuff the myth still
wins out over history now the difference
is that the rest of us know it's fake
because we have access to all that other
documentation why did that and why is
that myth become so popular why do so
many people believe it how did it get
invented it's an example of conspiracy
theories a lot of conspiracy theories
become really popular this is an example
of that conspiracy theories and code
worldviews they model fears and
assumptions and they explain events and
why things are as they are and it's
comforting to think that you know the
truth and everybody else is an ignorant
outsider and how they do that you use
culturally familiar symbols in this case
space-age technology futurism government
experimentation and corruption and
cover-ups and the whole thing but what
if civilization collapsed let's say
today and for hundreds of years
Roswell believers controlled and edited
all the documents that survived you
would not actually know about the
original sticks in tin foil you would
not know that the story was made up you
would be in the same position that you
are now with respect to the historical
Jesus and that is actually what happened
in the Middle Ages
so thanks that's my talk
[Applause]
how confidently can we say that there
was a Jewish sect at the turn of the
first millennium worshipping an angel
hurricane jold named Jesus why I say
highly certainty highly certain based on
the epistles of Paul now there is I mean
I would say like it's above 90% chance
that that's the epistles of Paul were
written in the 50s as we've figured out
from internal evidence and there and
they refer to events being 15 to 20
years earlier so that gives us the date
range of the origins of the sect and
everything there are some attempts to
argue that those letters actually date a
century later and there's arguments that
those letters date a century earlier and
they're not impossible I think I think
they're improbable but they're not
absurd so the confidence level is like
if this were instructions for a rocket
if the idea that they really did start
with a 30s ad like the like the
mainstream interpretation of the
epistles are if that were instructions
for a rocket I wouldn't get on that
rocket but I might like buy some cargo
on it you know do you have any idea what
the origin of the the image of Jesus
that we see right now the reason I ask
is because if you look at all the other
images of the dying and rising course
there they probably look less human than
the image of Jesus do we know anything
about the origin or how it came about
yeah I mean there are no images of Jesus
that go back to the beginning of their
religion the first images we see I
believe or third century so already were
200 years 300 years too late and they
just depict scenes in the Gospels just
like that picture of Mithras right and
Mithras looks pretty human there he just
looks like a soldier doing soldiery
things then and the Christians they saw
him as as a as a magic worker as
basically a Moses figure or an Elijah
figure so he's depicted in the earliest
art with a wand actually he accomplishes
all his deeds with wands and it just
looks like an ordinary rabbi or
something going around
casting spells with wands and that's the
original version of Jesus who looks
nothing at all like the later medieval
version of Jesus that we all know and
that that that then you know Jesus's
images it just gets transformed to be
what the church wants you to sell and
what market they want to appeal to so
they just keep reinventing the image of
Jesus but when you get back to the
original stuff it doesn't look anything
like them I have a question so you
talked about the historicity of Jesus
and you mentioned his the existence or
non-existence of his brothers what about
all of the other characters that go
along like Mary and Joseph and Pontius
Pilate and are all of these historical
figures fall under the same kind of
hypothesis that didn't exist so the way
I look at it is that because the
evidence is so suspicious because of all
this stuff that if you want to argue
that anybody in the Gospels is real you
need some evidence besides the Gospels
and we have that for some so like
Pontius Pilate Caiaphas certain other
figures we have evidence external to the
Bible that establish that they existed
and so the Gospels are actually creating
a narrative like historical fiction
essentially where they're borrowing real
people and putting them in there and
then having that care main character
Jesus interact with them or other
characters interact with them some other
figures that we know are real or within
the Christian tradition are James John
and caphis or Peter James and John being
the brothers of each other not the
Brothers of Jesus James John and Peter
were the pillars that Paul refers to as
the kind of the originators of the
Christian sect in Galatians 1 and 2 and
so yeah James John and Peter are all in
the Gospels so those are real people
that have been put in there and interact
made to interact with Jesus to sort of
represent things about the missionary
journey right the path from doubt to
belief and things like that so so yes
some of them are historical some of them
are probably unhistorical some we don't
know and I talked about many of them I
like you know this simon of cyrene ii
there's joseph of arimathea this Judas
so the question is like are these do
these people come from any hits
Oracle origin or are they completely
made up for the purpose in the text and
I discuss many examples of that in on
the historicity of Jesus I was wondering
do you think maybe it's possible that
the days of the great debates with
William Lane Craig and the lease
troubles over the world do you think
those are over or do you think it's
possible with the internet now and
people reading all about counter
apologetics that may be apologetics will
get more interesting that's have you
noticed them starting to shift oh it
always happens and you can see the
difference if you ever notice Muslim
apologetics is really not even terrible
and embarrassingly bad but it looks
exactly like Christian apologetics of
the Scopes Monkey Trial era so it looks
like apologetics a hundred years ago and
I think one of the main reasons for that
is that they've basically been jailing
or killing the opposition so they've
never had they're an essentially like
someone who has no immune system they've
never had to react to open discourse the
challenges that religion and but in the
West of course we have so the Christians
can't kill us or jail us even if they
might want to or try and so they
actually have to answer our arguments
and so they get more and more
sophisticated over time to try and make
their arguments look more impressive and
so that you figure you go and see some
of the most ridiculous arguments will be
couched in the most elegant formal
philosophical peer-review prose with
complete with footnotes and all of this
stuff looks exactly like mainstream
scholarship but it's complete bollocks
they figured that out because they know
it looks prestigious and they know they
can get it into peer review or whatever
for the particular religious journal or
whatever it is so so yes they keep
evolving trying to make more
sophisticated versions of their religion
or their apologetics as they keep
getting taken down and where that end
point where the end point is on that I
don't know I will just keep seeing how
they evolve and change and their
arguments of course yeah yeah he people
have tried to organize a second debate I
did a debate with William Lane Craig
people tried to organize the second
debate he says now I already beat
Richard carrier I don't need him
again and so yeah that's the big problem
there but but yes I would I would debate
him on anything that I have expertise in
question I would have sort of throughout
the presentation you made reference to
sort of the mainstream you know
scholarly consensus in a variety of
items but on the various or presenting
that Jesus probably didn't exist you
your your your position is decidedly
outside the mainstream the vast majority
of New Testament scholars and you know
historical experts from that you know of
that era would disagree with you and
believe that Jesus in some form did
exist so when you take that your rep
mainstream why is it that on this key
issue you're outside the mainstream why
did the majority of scholars not agree
with you on this yeah because they don't
know half the things in my book give an
example so I engaged with mark good
acres a renowned very capable very
erudite scholar biblical studies on
London radio and we were debating this
this Kunduz these two competing theories
and one of his arguments was that Paul
says in his letters that he learned the
that learned about Jesus from those who
are in Christ before him that he learned
it from the witnesses and I told him
like no that's not in Paul in fact Paul
says the exact opposite not only to say
the exact opposite he swears up and down
against it he's like no no I'm sure that
lines in there like no it's not and so
the commercial was a commercial break
and we were looking and he had to admit
like wow you're right that verse isn't
in there and yet for some reason his
whole life even as a PhD scholar in this
he thought there was a line in the
letters of Paul that said that and the
problem is of it that even mainstream
even secular experts in this field have
been trained and raised up with a body
of Christian faith assumptions that are
this this lens for which should look at
the evidence and selecting which
evidence to look at so that they
actually are kind of trained to only see
it one way and one of the things that I
do in my book on the historicity of
Jesus is fill out all of the things that
when I interacted with experts there
would be it's not that every expert
lacks us the same piece of information
each expert lacks some piece of
information and I would have to say they
would say something like that and I said
that's not true but you'll be a
different thing for every seat you stir
every single scholar engaged with
there'd be like
three or four things that they would
claim there are actually false and then
I could show them that there are false
and it's like how did you not know that
and when I added up all of the things
there's you know about a hundred two
hundred things and so that I cover that
in the book what I think the consensus
now is based on is based on this this
infrastructure of Christian faith
assumptions that that they're not
realizing don't vet if you don't
actually examine it so they need to
actually go back and skeptically look at
their own evidence and and do that in a
way that that makes sense and one of the
points of my book is to get it through
peer review so it's a peer reviewed book
published by Sheffield Phoenix which was
published off the campus of the
University of Sheffield by the by run by
Faculty of Sheffield and with the
intention of saying okay here's a peer
reviewed case because there's a lot of
really crappy versions of it you hear a
lot of the consensus is based on them
reading the internet arguments and
saying that's and that's true
it is but oh no don't read that
read them read your own peer reviewed
literature read the latest book on this
subject and then engage with that and so
the consensus is right now is based on
ignorance of this new discovery set of
stuff that they really need to relook at
and rethink about and they're just not
doing it so until we get scholars to
really engage with this theory we're not
really sure if their consensus position
is based on logical or factually correct
reasoning and so that's the problem that
we're in now there's not really anything
we can do about it unless we can
encourage scholars to read the book and
engage with it honestly as scholars and
and and rethink things and then see
where they come out with it I would love
to see someone come up with a defense of
historicity that addresses all and
incorporates all the evidence I had
gathering on the historicity of Jesus
that is the best defense of historicity
you can give so that I could have people
like you read you say read that book and
then read this other book and then you
can compare because these are the two
best cases there are and you can come to
your own conclusion you don't have to
rely on the opinions of any consensus a
consensus that is largely driven by
actual Christians so that you know a
secular scholars are not the majority in
the field so that's where it has to go
but if scholars keep ignoring the book
and you can wring their own
peer-reviewed literature I don't know
what to argue in terms of how to get
them to rethink their position
so further to this theme I'm curious
what what gets you to such a level of
certainty isn't it under your own
argument still possible that Jesus
person existed but what we know about
him is just all fanfiction right that
there was some person that started at
all but everything else just and you did
mention that upper bound and the lower
bound but I didn't hear something I
didn't hear anything that definitively
says there wasn't you know a person just
everything else could be false right the
evidence sucks let's just start there
like the evidence is really poor shape
most of its gone it's all altered or
doctored
so this is like one of the hardest
questions to get it I think there are
harder ones like the historicity of
Muhammad is even harder because there's
so much more document destruction so in
this particular case yes I don't think
we can be certain because we don't have
the documentation we need if we had the
kind of documentation for the first
century that we do for like the 18th
century and we were dealing with Ned
Ludd is another person who was invented
he was the hero of the 18th century that
started the Luddite movement he didn't
exist but we have really good
documentation for the 18th centuries we
can definitively show that he didn't
exist because we have newspapers we have
census records and things like that
we don't have that for Jesus so we can't
be certain that's why the margins of
error are huge it's like well that's why
I say it's 1 in 3 that there was a Jesus
which is you know a respectable chance
that there really was a guy instead of
this alternative theory so no I don't
think we can be certain at all I just
think it's a preponderance of evidence
standard but yeah it's not beyond a
reasonable doubt
does anybody you have a question so
continuing from that where are you
getting that numbers one and three and
one in 12,000 yeah how did curiosity
yesterday start with a prior so I built
the prior out of data and
prior probability out of data and then I
look at the relative probabilities of
the evidence and they're all I use the
same thing where I think like the
highest probability that this reasonably
could have given what we know given what
I know and what is the lowest
probability that it can have reasonably
have given what I know and it commutes
so if you say it's the highest and
lowest that it could reasonably be the
conclusion will be the highest and
lowest it can reasonably be as long as
you stick to that model all the way
through and really all I am doing is is
new putting a number to what are usually
vague statements that historians make
they'll say like oh that's very
improbable it's like what do you mean
very improbable you don't mean 40% that
you wouldn't call 40% very improbable so
when you say these probabilities you
really got a pic like what's the highest
probability that would actually
correspond to what you mean when you say
that and then that's the number you use
is the upper bound for that so it's it's
that kind of thinking in terms of how do
we actually quantify what we're already
saying so that we can actually build a
logically valid argument from premise to
conclusion if you don't do that you
actually don't know that your conclusion
logically follows from your premises if
you can't say like well this is very
improbable therefore the conclusion is
very improbable because there's a lot of
other factors in there and you can't
actually work out the logic unless
you're going to be doing some sort of
numerical estimate estimation to like
figure out what do you mean by very
improbable and it's the same all the way
through so if you want to see it
actually built out and that's what the
it happens in the book so every single
chapter that deals with the evidence and
on the historicity of Jesus I end with
this is why these how I come up with a
numbers I do and these are the places
where you could come up with your own
numbers and see what comes out the other
end with your own estimates and that
that's the the whole model of how to do
it in the book yeah well I mean they're
subjective in the sense that I am basing
them on what I think the evidence
suggests it is yeah but it is still it's
still an assertion about an objective
frequency though so like if I talk about
one out of every three people who look
just like Jesus didn't exist that's
actually an actual frequency from actual
examples of people like Jesus but but
sometimes the it's vague like you can
say so for instance one of the things in
there is there's there's a version of
Jesus that set
seventy-five BC in fact the only version
of Jesus known to the Jews who wrote the
Babylonian Talmud outside the Roman
Empire is that Jesus who lived and died
in 75 BC now you have to wonder like how
could that be how could there be a sect
of Christians it was putting Jesus a
hundred years earlier and you say that
that looks slightly more likely if there
was no originally historical Jesus and
he was historically inside the Empire
than outside the Empire but the
difference in probability is small and
so he then you have to represent like
what do I mean by small etc and then you
go from there so you are you are trying
to think of what the objective
probabilities would be but often times
you don't have hard data and so you just
have to look for boundaries of where
your subjective knowledge sort of bumps
up against objective reality and then
understand that that's what you're doing
and when you go in I'm glad I got the
mic back because that fella over there
has a whole page for you so you might be
busy later you Richard you'd mentioned
earlier on you're talking about you know
and Paul's comments on you know the
Lord's Supper and such and had you said
that that Paul did not call it the
Lord's Supper he didn't call the last
okay yeah I guess just call he did yeah
they called the Lord's Supper I'm just
like just the section and here where he
he says where I receive from the Lord we
also delivered to you with Lord Jesus on
the night when he was betrayed took
bread we'd give any thanks and then we
it runs very close to how it reads in
the gospel and Gospels at people there
so but I mean it doesn't really make
sense to read this and assume that Jesus
is sitting in some room by himself it
certainly looks like he's well if he
who's he talking to when he's saying so
you'll want to read my section on that
in there if you read that the theology
of that actually doesn't make sense and
in fact a lot of scholars agree with
this that there's no way that can be
really what Jesus said originally
because it's actually anticipating a
church that didn't exist yet and it's
anticipating a theology that's much more
sophisticated and doesn't fit actually
what you know a Jewish rabbi would
actually say of himself okay it makes
sense more as though he's like
communicating by revelation to the RET
to the revelatory of the revell of T
right so he's speaking to the Christians
of the future and you look at the
addresses he's talking about all future
Christians he's literally talking to
Christians
not just the disciples he's not saying
only you disciples would get these
benefits he's talking to all future
Christians so he said this is a vision
that's actually directed at the
Christian community in the abstract and
that's when Paul saying I some received
in the vision that's what I see we see
from the Lord he's talking about I had a
vision of Jesus saying this to us so
what's Paul referring to then when he
says on the night when he was betrayed
he's referring to the actual so this is
the part we're talking bout where Jesus
is actually killed by Satan and his
demons and stuff so there is a narrative
in there that's a taking place in
another realm not on earth but for Paul
it's not something that they're right
humans there to see it's something that
went on and we only learn about through
visions but it isn't actual for him it's
an actual historical event it's just not
one that took place in Jerusalem for
example I'm gonna talk about more in the
book of course but is there any other
question sir because you again will take
a couple more questions than I guess
wrap up
you had mentioned well I'm just curious
how does your standard is it an
impossible standard to expect that 2,000
years ago that there were accurate
documents for someone existing that had
a very small group of people around them
and what if you applied this to someone
else at that period of time how does
your standard compared to doing this to
someone else that I've done exist
actually use a lot of comparable
examples I do Socrates Alexander the
Great and various other peoples have
done this so I take examples of other
people did on my blog because I did
several examples in the book Socrates
being perhaps the closest parallel that
you want to look at because he's someone
who didn't write anything and we only
know about what he said through his
disciples or disciples and disciples and
so on
so but and that's I show the difference
like why it's different between Socrates
and Jesus and there's many different
reasons why they're different but others
have come up with others since then they
do like Spartacus I can't think of
others out the Pontius Pilate Herod and
typists so I've actually written several
articles on my blog right talk about
low-key how let's look at those like
look at the
difference there's several differences
between them and even if people were to
pick someone really obscure like some
minor official that only gets mentioned
once and Josephus you have the
similarity there that the reference
class for a minor official in a history
written by someone who actually knows
what he's talking about and has
researched that history they're used
they usually do exist whereas when you
look at like worship Savior demigods
they usually don't exist so your
reference class changes your prior
probability and then it's a question of
it so if you don't have the evidence
sometimes all you have is the prior
you're if you don't know what is the
true in this particular case all you
know is the base rate and and that's you
have to run with that but if there's
cases where there's actual evidence like
we have for Pontius Pilate and Herod
Antipas it's not just like a one-off
mention in Josephus we actually know we
have multiple collaboratory pieces of
evidence that actually ups the odds that
the historical existed such that if we
had the evidence for Pontius Pilate or
harridan typists that we had four if we
had they haven't sweat for them for
Jesus I'd be up here arguing for
historicity instead so yeah there's many
ways you can do that there's a lot of
examples I've dealt with on my blog and
in the book so do we I was learning some
of these safer God's do we have an
online source where we can look to see
like the pictures of the documentation
of the original or we get this
information from which thing give me an
example I'm like Osiris do we like I
think he's written on tablets right well
the Osiris story exists in many
different places or the fragments of it
in different places with different
sources but the earliest and most
reliable are the stories written on the
pyramid walls there's actually they go
back thousands of years there's other
sources like Plutarch they give us some
information
Plutarch's writing about 75 AD and he is
actually a priest of that cult so he's
actually and he's writing to a pre a
fellow Priestess of the same religion so
he's actually an insider writing to an
insider at exactly the time when
Christianity arose or we can see
parallels and things so we have a
variety of different sources of that how
we access those things is complicated so
like for example how do we know what
Plutarch wrote that's a whole other
issue that's been dealt with by Plutarch
experts
for the last 100 200 years in terms of
developing critical texts looking at
multiple manuscripts etc that's a much
wider question and each piece of
evidence has that problematic background
to it but but everybody deals with that
so even the people defending historicity
have to deal with the same problem so
yeah I couldn't like I could give a
whole lecture on just one thing like
Plutarch's manuscripts for example and
that's just one out of like thousands of
pieces of evidence but yeah it's what we
that what they teach us to do it's what
with a PhD is for so like train you like
figure out like this is really
complicated how do we get at this stuff
how reliable is it and and and so on
it's not easily accessible to average
people sometimes it is and it's getting
more and more the case more stuff is
ending up online
what's it I mean you could get a PhD but
you might not still know what you're
doing I've always found what to pedia
helpful but everybody goes oh my god we
go to the bottom find out what they're
referencing and dig around and you know
that's the way thieves Wikipedia and not
read Wikipedia and say it says it in
Wikipedia it's true yeah you have to dig
a little bit more ok I have the mic
renewed anyone else have another
question before we I didn't know people
like this still existed but I I come
from Starbuck and and I ran to a fellow
a couple years ago now who actually
believes the earth is flat really yes
and he he he earnestly believes it he's
actually claims to have written a book
kind of his own Bible in and I and he
references authors and I actually went
online and these people exist online
yeah
I'm Eeva bull and I mean it's it's
amazing what's out there what people
will see online and what they will
believe and and and the number of
references that will support this these
crazy nutjob ideas yeah yeah astounding
yeah on the internet it's problematic
because sometimes you can't tell if it's
a poem or an authentic thing so a Poe is
when someone writes a attacks pretending
to be the actual thing that if you're
trying to mock something like the best
mockery of a thing looks
indistinguishable from the thing itself
yeah but I on the internet I don't know
sometimes I can't tell when I'm reading
something like do they really believe
what they're saying or is this just a
joke and then of course I meet people
like you who've met people and say ya
know they really freaking believe it
yeah it is so alright thank you everyone
for coming out this evening I think it's
been really interesting before we end I
just wanted to mention thank you to our
audio-visual staff who we're not paying
because this is a volunteer thing so
thank Robert and Paul please
[Applause]